.TH MAGUS 1 "" "magus" "magus Manual"
.SH NAME
magus \- workspace-aware build orchestrator and content-addressed cache
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B magus
.RI [ flags ]\ <subcommand>\ [ args ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
magus is a standalone build orchestrator and content\-addressed cache for
multi\-language monorepos, and an evolution of Mage. It provides workspace\-aware
subcommands for building, testing, linting, and inspecting projects without
requiring Mage to be installed.
.PP
magus reads optional configuration from magus.yaml (XDG, workspace root, or
CWD) and MAGUS_* environment variables. All configuration can be overridden
with CLI flags.
.SH GLOBAL FLAGS
Global flags are accepted by every subcommand and may appear before or
after the subcommand word. Last\-write\-wins, matching kubectl conventions.
.TP
\fB\-\-root\fR \fIpath\fR
Workspace root. Default: walk up from cwd until go.mod is found. Must precede the subcommand.
.TP
\fB\-\-config\fR \fIpath\fR
Config file path. Default: search for magus.yaml in CWD, workspace root, and $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/magus/. Must precede the subcommand.
.TP
\fB\-\-output\fR \fIfmt\fR, \fB\-o\fR \fIfmt\fR
Output format: text (default), json, yaml, name, or template=<go\-template>. Honoured by subcommands that emit structured data.
.TP
\fB\-\-concurrency\fR \fIN\fR
Maximum number of concurrent build steps. 0 means use the configured value (or MAGUS_CONCURRENCY, or min(NumCPU,8)).
.TP
\fB\-v\fR
Increase log verbosity. Repeat for more detail (\-v, \-vv, \-vvv).
.SH SUBCOMMANDS
.RS
.TP
\fBls\fR
List all discovered projects. See \fBmagus\-ls\fR(1).
.TP
\fBdescribe\fR
Define a magus concept and list its entities. See \fBmagus\-describe\fR(1).
.TP
\fBrun\fR
Run a target for selected projects. See \fBmagus\-run\fR(1).
.TP
\fBx\fR
Interactive shorthand: pick project + target. See \fBmagus\-x\fR(1).
.TP
\fBwhere\fR
Print the absolute path of a project. See \fBmagus\-where\fR(1).
.TP
\fBtail\fR
Stream the most recent cached log (interactive only). See \fBmagus\-tail\fR(1).
.TP
\fBaffected\fR
Run a target for VCS\-diff affected projects. See \fBmagus\-affected\fR(1).
.TP
\fBinsight\fR
Behavioral code analysis from VCS history. See \fBmagus\-insight\fR(1).
.TP
\fBgraph\fR
The workspace's graphs as objects: deps, export, stats. See \fBmagus\-graph\fR(1).
.TP
\fBwatch\fR
Emit changed file paths to stdout. See \fBmagus\-watch\fR(1).
.TP
\fBstatus\fR
Inspect concurrency pool and configuration. See \fBmagus\-status\fR(1).
.TP
\fBdoctor\fR
Validate the workspace. See \fBmagus\-doctor\fR(1).
.TP
\fBconfig\fR
View or update magus configuration. See \fBmagus\-config\fR(1).
.TP
\fBserver\fR
Manage the persistent magus daemon. See \fBmagus\-server\fR(1).
.TP
\fBcompletion\fR
Print a shell completion script. See \fBmagus\-completion\fR(1).
.TP
\fBinit\fR
Bootstrap a workspace (magus.yaml + magusfile.buzz + merge driver). See \fBmagus\-init\fR(1).
.TP
\fBself\fR
Manage the magus binary (update). See \fBmagus\-self\fR(1).
.TP
\fBversion\fR
Print version, commit, and build date. See \fBmagus\-version\fR(1).
.RE
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.RS
.TP
\fBMAGUS_CACHE_DIR\fR
Override the default cache location (.magus/ in the workspace root). Equivalent magus.yaml key: \fBcache.dir\fR.
.TP
\fBMAGUS_CACHE_IMMUTABLE\fR
When true (or 1), open the cache in read\-only mode: replay hits but never write new entries (default: false). Equivalent magus.yaml key: \fBcache.immutable\fR.
.TP
\fBMAGUS_CACHE_SIZE_MB\fR
Cache disk usage cap in MB (binary, 1<<20); 0 means unlimited (default: 0). Equivalent magus.yaml key: \fBcache.size_mb\fR.
.TP
\fBMAGUS_CACHE_REMOTE_INSECURE\fR
Disable remote\-cache signature verification (accept/produce unsigned artifacts); for trusted single\-repo CI only (default: false). Equivalent magus.yaml key: \fBcache.remote.insecure\fR.
.TP
\fBMAGUS_LOG_FORMAT\fR
Output format: pretty, plain, text, or json (default: pretty). Equivalent magus.yaml key: \fBlog.format\fR.
.TP
\fBMAGUS_LOG_LEVEL\fR
Minimum log level: trace, debug, info, warn, error (trace also prints the startup timing table) (default: info). Equivalent magus.yaml key: \fBlog.level\fR.
.TP
\fBMAGUS_CONCURRENCY\fR
Maximum number of concurrently running per\-project build steps (default: min(NumCPU,8)). Equivalent magus.yaml key: \fBconcurrency\fR.
.TP
\fBMAGUS_HISTORY_PATH\fR
Path to the runtime\-history JSON shared by flake detection, the CI forecaster, graph timing, and bisect (default: $XDG_STATE_HOME/magus/history/v1.json). Equivalent magus.yaml key: \fBhistory_path\fR.
.TP
\fBMAGUS_DRY_RUN\fR
When 1 or true, print what would run without executing anything (default: false). Equivalent magus.yaml key: \fBdry_run\fR.
.TP
\fBMAGUS_DEFAULT_CHARMS\fR
Comma\-separated charms applied to every magus run/x by default (e.g. rw); the ci anchor still strips rw, and \-\-no\-default\-charms ignores them for one run. Equivalent magus.yaml key: \fBdefault_charms\fR.
.TP
\fBMAGUS_VCS_ENABLED\fR
Master switch for VCS\-driven affected detection; false makes affected fall back to all projects (default: true). Equivalent magus.yaml key: \fBvcs.enabled\fR.
.TP
\fBMAGUS_VCS_NAME\fR
Pin the active VCS by name (git, hg, jj); empty autodetects from .git/.hg/.jj. Equivalent magus.yaml key: \fBvcs.name\fR.
.TP
\fBMAGUS_VCS_BASE_REF\fR
Default base ref for the active VCS adapter, e.g. origin/main for git. Equivalent magus.yaml key: \fBvcs.base_ref\fR.
.TP
\fBMAGUS_VCS_<NAME>_BASE_REF\fR
Per\-VCS base\-ref override, e.g. MAGUS_VCS_GIT_BASE_REF; dynamic pattern, read directly by package vcs
.TP
\fBMAGUS_DAEMON_SOCKET\fR
Runtime proc\-server socket set by the daemon for forwarded child processes; unix:// URL or bare path. Equivalent magus.yaml key: \fBdaemon.socket\fR.
.TP
\fBMAGUS_CI_MAX_SHARDS\fR
Maximum number of parallel CI shards; \-1 means unlimited (default: 8). Equivalent magus.yaml key: \fBci.max_shards\fR.
.TP
\fBMAGUS_CI_RUNNER_POOL_BUDGET\fR
Cross\-shard concurrency cap at the GHA matrix level; 0 means unlimited (default: 0). Equivalent magus.yaml key: \fBci.runner_pool_budget\fR.
.TP
\fBMAGUS_SHARD\fR
CI matrix shard ID (e.g. "0"); equivalent to magus run \-\-shard; set by .github/actions/magus
.TP
\fBMAGUS_N_SHARDS\fR
Total shard count for this matrix run; equivalent to magus run \-\-n\-shards; set by .github/actions/magus
.TP
\fBMAGUS_GRAPH_DIRECTION\fR
Default graph direction: downstream or upstream (default: downstream). Equivalent magus.yaml key: \fBgraph.direction\fR.
.TP
\fBMAGUS_GRAPH_SPELL\fR
Filter graph output to a single spell. Equivalent magus.yaml key: \fBgraph.spell\fR.
.TP
\fBMAGUS_GRAPH_DEPTH\fR
Cap displayed graph depth (0 = unlimited) (default: 0). Equivalent magus.yaml key: \fBgraph.depth\fR.
.TP
\fBMAGUS_GRAPH_ROOTS\fR
Comma\-separated starting nodes for graph traversal. Equivalent magus.yaml key: \fBgraph.roots\fR.
.TP
\fBMAGUS_TELEMETRY_ENABLED\fR
Turn OTLP export on; magus connects to telemetry.endpoint when true (default: false). Equivalent magus.yaml key: \fBtelemetry.enabled\fR.
.TP
\fBMAGUS_TELEMETRY_ENDPOINT\fR
OTLP collector address as host:port (no scheme); required when telemetry is enabled. Equivalent magus.yaml key: \fBtelemetry.endpoint\fR.
.TP
\fBMAGUS_TELEMETRY_PROTOCOL\fR
OTLP wire protocol: grpc or http (default: grpc). Equivalent magus.yaml key: \fBtelemetry.protocol\fR.
.TP
\fBMAGUS_TELEMETRY_INSECURE\fR
Disable TLS for the OTLP exporter (plaintext local\-collector setups) (default: false). Equivalent magus.yaml key: \fBtelemetry.insecure\fR.
.TP
\fBMAGUS_TELEMETRY_SERVICE_NAME\fR
Value of the resource attribute service.name on emitted spans/metrics (default: magus). Equivalent magus.yaml key: \fBtelemetry.service_name\fR.
.TP
\fBMAGUS_TELEMETRY_SAMPLE_RATIO\fR
Head\-based trace sampling ratio in [0,1] (default: 1.0). Equivalent magus.yaml key: \fBtelemetry.sample_ratio\fR.
.TP
\fBMAGUS_DAEMON_ADDRESS\fR
Adopt\-server socket as a unix:// URL; empty auto\-generates a per\-process socket. Equivalent magus.yaml key: \fBdaemon.address\fR.
.TP
\fBMAGUS_DAEMON_IDLE_TTL\fR
Idle workspace eviction TTL for the multi\-workspace daemon; e.g. "6h", "30m" (default: 6h). Equivalent magus.yaml key: \fBdaemon.idle_ttl\fR.
.TP
\fBMAGUS_DAEMON_WORKSPACES\fR
Colon\-separated list of workspace roots the daemon will serve; non\-empty list triggers eager union of sandbox policies and rejection of out\-of\-list workspaces (MGS2010). Equivalent magus.yaml key: \fBdaemon.workspaces\fR.
.TP
\fBMAGUS_ASSUME_INTERACTIVE\fR
When 1 or true, assume an interactive terminal even if detection says otherwise (default: false). Equivalent magus.yaml key: \fBassume_interactive\fR.
.TP
\fBMAGUS_MCP_ENABLED\fR
When 0 or false, refuse to start the MCP server even when the binary was built with \-tags mcp (default: true). Equivalent magus.yaml key: \fBmcp.enabled\fR.
.TP
\fBMAGUS_MCP_ADDRESS\fR
host:port for the MCP Streamable HTTP server started alongside the daemon (default: 127.0.0.1:7391). Equivalent magus.yaml key: \fBmcp.address\fR.
.TP
\fBMAGUS_HINTS_ENABLED\fR
When false, suppress all hint messages printed to stderr (default: true). Equivalent magus.yaml key: \fBhints.enabled\fR.
.TP
\fBMAGUS_FLAKE_ENABLED\fR
Master switch for flakiness detection and auto\-retry; false disables all retry logic (default: true). Equivalent magus.yaml key: \fBflake.enabled\fR.
.TP
\fBMAGUS_FLAKE_BOOTSTRAP_SAMPLES\fR
Number of outcomes below which all failures are retried once (bootstrap phase) (default: 20). Equivalent magus.yaml key: \fBflake.bootstrap_samples\fR.
.TP
\fBMAGUS_FLAKE_MIN_SAMPLES\fR
Minimum outcomes required before Wilson\-score flake rate gates retry decisions (default: 20). Equivalent magus.yaml key: \fBflake.min_samples\fR.
.TP
\fBMAGUS_FLAKE_THRESHOLD\fR
Wilson lower\-bound flake rate above which a project+target is considered flaky (default: 0.05). Equivalent magus.yaml key: \fBflake.threshold\fR.
.TP
\fBMAGUS_FLAKE_ANNOTATE_GHA\fR
When true, emit ::warning annotations and flake summary to $GITHUB_STEP_SUMMARY (default: true). Equivalent magus.yaml key: \fBflake.annotate_gha\fR.
.TP
\fBMAGUS_REPORT_FILTER\fR
Comma\-separated +type/\-type terms restricting JSONL event emission (e.g. \-graph.build,\-graph.query). Equivalent magus.yaml key: \fBreport.filter\fR.
.TP
\fBMAGUS_SANDBOX_ENABLED\fR
When 1 or true, confine every subprocess and in\-process spell to the workspace + a curated allowlist, scrub the child\-process env to a minimum allowlist, and refuse paths outside it. See magus.yaml sandbox.allow and sandbox.env.passthrough for extension (default: false). Equivalent magus.yaml key: \fBsandbox.enabled\fR.
.TP
\fBMAGUS_UPDATE_URL\fR
Env\-only, no magus.yaml equivalent: override the release index URL for `magus self update`; set to a self\-hosted copy of index.json to use a private update channel (default: https://eli.gladman.cc/magus/public/release/index.json)
.RE
.SH FILES
.TP
\fBmagus.yaml\fR, \fB.magus.yaml\fR
Configuration file. Searched in CWD, workspace root, and
$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/magus/ in ascending priority order. Both plain and
dot\-prefixed names are accepted; having both in the same directory is an error.
.TP
\fB.magus\-cache/\fR
Content\-addressed build cache in the workspace root. Override with
MAGUS_CACHE_DIR.
.SH SEE ALSO
\fBmagus\-ls\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-describe\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-run\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-x\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-where\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-tail\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-affected\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-insight\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-graph\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-watch\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-status\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-doctor\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-config\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-server\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-completion\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-init\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-self\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-version\fR(1)
.br
