.TH MAGUS-GRAPH 1 "" "magus" "magus Manual"
.SH NAME
magus\-graph \- The workspace's graphs as objects: deps, export, stats
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B magus
.RI "graph <deps|export|stats> [flags]"
.SH DESCRIPTION
The workspace's graphs as objects: emit, export, and measure them. The
query, explain, and path verbs read the knowledge graph; magus graph is the
home of the graph itself.
.PP
Subcommands (the first argument):
.PP
deps     The project dependency DAG. A trailing list of project paths roots
           the graph; \-o selects text, json, yaml, dot, mermaid, or tree. The
           same view scoped to a run is available as magus run <target> \-\-graph
           and magus affected <target> \-\-graph.
  export   The merged knowledge graph: the deterministic, cache\-backed graph of
           the magus domain (projects, targets, spells, ops, charms, modules,
           methods, diagnostics, docs, buzz sources). \-o json emits the
           node\-link form; \-o graphml emits GraphML. External graph viewers
           (Gephi, yEd) read both directly. The graph is cache\-backed under
           <cache>/knowledge; only shards whose sources changed are rebuilt.
  stats    The graph's shape: god nodes (the most connected spells, modules,
           targets \- where structural risk concentrates), orphans (docs that
           document nothing, spells no target uses), and doc coverage (the
           share of diagnostics, spells, and modules with a doc). \-\-kind scopes
           every section to one node kind. insight report embeds this section.
.SS graph deps options
.RS
.TP
\fB\-\-depth\fR \fIint\fR
Cap displayed depth (0 = unlimited)
.TP
\fB\-\-spell\fR \fIstring\fR
Only projects driven by this spell
.TP
\fB\-\-target\fR \fIstring\fR
Target whose duration history annotates nodes (default: build)
.TP
\fB\-\-upstream\fR
Show dependents instead of dependencies
.RE
.SS graph export options
.RS
.TP
\fB\-\-refresh\fR
Force a full graph rebuild before exporting
.RE
.SS graph stats options
.RS
.TP
\fB\-\-kind\fR \fIstring\fR
Scope every section to one node kind (spell, target, doc, ...)
.TP
\fB\-\-refresh\fR
Force a full graph rebuild first
.RE
.SH SUBCOMMANDS
.RS
.TP
\fBdeps\fR
Emit the project dependency DAG (text, json, yaml, dot, mermaid, tree)
.TP
\fBexport\fR
Export the merged knowledge graph (json node\-link or graphml)
.TP
\fBstats\fR
Report the knowledge graph's shape: god nodes, orphans, doc coverage
.RE
.SH EXAMPLES
\fIProject DAG as Mermaid\fR
.PP
.EX
magus graph deps -o mermaid
.EE
.PP
\fIDAG rooted at one project, dependents up\fR
.PP
.EX
magus graph deps pkg/api --upstream
.EE
.PP
\fIKnowledge graph for an external viewer\fR
.PP
.EX
magus graph export -o json > graph.json
.EE
.PP
\fIGraphML for Gephi or yEd\fR
.PP
.EX
magus graph export -o graphml > graph.graphml
.EE
.PP
\fIWhere structural risk concentrates\fR
.PP
.EX
magus graph stats
.EE
.PP
\fIDoc coverage for spells only\fR
.PP
.EX
magus graph stats --kind spell
.EE
.PP
.SH SEE ALSO
\fBmagus\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-ls\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-describe\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-run\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-x\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-where\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-tail\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-affected\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-insight\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-watch\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-status\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-doctor\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-config\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-server\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-completion\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-init\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-self\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-version\fR(1)
.br
