.TH MAGUS-CHURN 1 "" "magus dev" "magus Manual"
.SH NAME
magus\-churn \- Rank projects by recent edit frequency (churn)
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B magus
.RI "churn [flags]"
.SH DESCRIPTION
Rank projects by how often recent commits touched them — a proxy for
where a codebase's attention and risk concentrate — joined with each project's
author count (bus factor), recency, and blast radius (how many projects a change
here would affect).
.PP
The scan is contextual to the working directory: run from inside a subtree and
churn reflects only that subtree's history. The active VCS adapter must be able
to report per\-commit files (git can); when it cannot, or VCS is disabled, churn
reports an error rather than guessing.
.PP
\-\-since bounds the window by commit date (90d, 12w, 6mo, 1y). \-\-files ranks
individual files instead of projects. \-\-coupling reports projects that change
together (temporal coupling) — modules that co\-evolve whether or not a dependency
edge connects them.
.PP
Text output is a ranked table. \-o mermaid draws the dependency graph heat\-
coloured by churn (or, with \-\-coupling, the co\-change graph); \-o json/yaml emit
the structured nodes, files, and pairs.
.SH OPTIONS
.RS
.TP
\fB\-\-commits\fR \fIint\fR (default: 500)
Cap on how many recent commits to scan
.TP
\fB\-\-coupling\fR
Report projects that change together (temporal coupling)
.TP
\fB\-\-files\fR
Rank individual files instead of projects
.TP
\fB\-\-since\fR \fIstring\fR
Only commits within this window (e.g. 90d, 12w, 6mo, 1y)
.RE
.SH EXAMPLES
\fIRank the whole workspace by churn\fR
.PP
.EX
magus churn
.EE
.PP
\fIOnly the last quarter\fR
.PP
.EX
magus churn --since 90d
.EE
.PP
\fIFind the hottest individual files\fR
.PP
.EX
magus churn --files
.EE
.PP
\fIProjects that change together\fR
.PP
.EX
magus churn --coupling
.EE
.PP
\fIHeatmap as Mermaid\fR
.PP
.EX
magus churn -o mermaid
.EE
.PP
\fIChurn of the subtree you're in\fR
.PP
.EX
cd web/studio && magus churn
.EE
.PP
.SH SEE ALSO
\fBmagus\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-ls\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-describe\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-run\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-x\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-where\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-tail\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-affected\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-watch\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-status\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-doctor\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-config\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-server\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-completion\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-init\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-self\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-version\fR(1)
.br
