.TH MAGUS-X 1 "" "magus" "magus Manual"
.SH NAME
magus\-x \- Interactive shorthand: pick project + target
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B magus
.RI "x [filter...]"
.SH DESCRIPTION
Interactive shorthand for magus run. Filters are AND\-combined
substrings matched against project paths; ranking is leaf\-anchored
longest\-match\-wins, so "magus x dash" prefers a project named "dashboard"
over one named "dashboards\-deprecated/foo". Additional filter args narrow
the candidate set: "magus x dash mobile" requires both substrings.
.PP
When the filtered set is unique, the project picker is skipped. Otherwise
a TTY picker opens, seeded with the survivors, sorted by score. After a
project is chosen, a second picker offers the target set
(build/test/lint/format/clean/generate/ci); the last target used for that
project (persisted in $XDG_STATE_HOME/magus/x\-state.json, defaulting to
$HOME/.local/state/magus/) is pre\-highlighted.
.PP
x refuses to run when stdin or stderr is not a terminal: shorthand is for
humans. Scripts should call magus run directly.
.SH EXAMPLES
\fIBrowse all projects in a picker\fR
.PP
.EX
magus x
.EE
.PP
\fIResolve by leaf substring\fR
.PP
.EX
magus x dash
.EE
.PP
\fIAND\-narrow with a second filter\fR
.PP
.EX
magus x dash mobile
.EE
.PP
.SH SEE ALSO
\fBmagus\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-ls\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-describe\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-run\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-where\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-tail\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-affected\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-insight\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-watch\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-status\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-doctor\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-config\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-server\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-completion\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-init\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-self\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-version\fR(1)
.br
