.TH MAGUS-GRAPH 1 "" "magus" "magus Manual"
.SH NAME
magus\-graph \- The workspace's graphs as objects: deps, export, stats
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B magus
.RI "graph <deps|export|stats|open> [flags]"
.SH DESCRIPTION
The workspace's graphs as objects: emit, export, and measure them. The
query, explain, and path verbs read the knowledge graph; magus graph is the
home of the graph itself.
.PP
Subcommands (the first argument):
.PP
deps     The project dependency DAG. A trailing list of project paths roots
           the graph; \-o selects text, json, yaml, dot, mermaid, or tree. The
           same view scoped to a run is available as magus run <target> \-\-graph
           and magus affected <target> \-\-graph.
  export   The merged knowledge graph: the deterministic, cache\-backed graph of
           the magus domain (projects, targets, spells, ops, charms, modules,
           methods, diagnostics, docs, buzz sources). \-o json emits the
           node\-link form; \-o graphml emits GraphML. External graph viewers
           (Gephi, yEd) read both directly. \-\-select "<terms>" narrows the
           export to a query's neighborhood (same engine as magus query); \-o dot
           and \-o mermaid render only with \-\-select, since the full graph has too
           many nodes to lay out. The graph is cache\-backed under
           <cache>/knowledge; only shards whose sources changed are rebuilt.
  stats    The graph's shape: god nodes (the most connected spells, modules,
           targets \- where structural risk concentrates), orphans (docs that
           document nothing, spells no target uses), and doc coverage (the
           share of diagnostics, spells, and modules with a doc). \-\-kind scopes
           every section to one node kind. insight report embeds this section.
  open     Open the workspace's knowledge graph (or target dependency graph with
           \-\-targets) in the hosted, interactive Graph Explorer. The graph is
           delivered privately: by default it rides in the URL fragment
           (#data=...), which browsers never send to a server; \-\-serve instead
           hands it from an ephemeral 127.0.0.1 loopback server (no size limit).
.SS graph deps options
.RS
.TP
\fB\-\-depth\fR \fIint\fR
Cap displayed depth (0 = unlimited)
.TP
\fB\-\-spell\fR \fIstring\fR
Only projects driven by this spell
.TP
\fB\-\-target\fR \fIstring\fR
Target whose duration history annotates nodes (default: build)
.TP
\fB\-\-upstream\fR
Show dependents instead of dependencies
.RE
.SS graph export options
.RS
.TP
\fB\-\-budget\fR \fIint\fR (default: 50)
Node budget for \-\-select (how many nodes the neighborhood may collect)
.TP
\fB\-\-global\fR
Union the workspaces registered in config (knowledge.workspaces); node IDs are namespaced by workspace
.TP
\fB\-\-refresh\fR
Force a full graph rebuild before exporting
.TP
\fB\-\-select\fR \fIstring\fR
Export only the neighborhood of a query (same grammar as magus query); required for \-o dot and \-o mermaid
.RE
.SS graph stats options
.RS
.TP
\fB\-\-global\fR
Union the workspaces registered in config (knowledge.workspaces) before computing stats
.TP
\fB\-\-kind\fR \fIstring\fR
Scope every section to one node kind (spell, target, doc, ...)
.TP
\fB\-\-refresh\fR
Force a full graph rebuild first
.RE
.SS graph open options
.RS
.TP
\fB\-\-print\fR
Print the explorer URL to stdout instead of opening a browser
.TP
\fB\-\-refresh\fR
Force a full graph rebuild before opening (knowledge graph only)
.TP
\fB\-\-serve\fR
Hand the graph to the page from an ephemeral loopback server instead of a URL fragment (no size limit; incompatible with \-\-targets)
.TP
\fB\-\-targets\fR
Open the target dependency graph instead of the knowledge graph; pass a project path as a positional argument to scope to one project
.TP
\fB\-\-url\fR \fIstring\fR (default: https://eli.gladman.cc/magus/console/graph/)
Base URL of the Graph Explorer page (override for a self\-hosted mirror)
.RE
.SH SUBCOMMANDS
.RS
.TP
\fBdeps\fR
Emit the project dependency DAG (text, json, yaml, dot, mermaid, tree)
.TP
\fBexport\fR
Export the merged knowledge graph (json node\-link or graphml)
.TP
\fBstats\fR
Report the knowledge graph's shape: god nodes, orphans, doc coverage
.TP
\fBopen\fR
Open the workspace graph in the hosted Graph Explorer (data never leaves your machine)
.RE
.SH EXAMPLES
\fIProject DAG as Mermaid\fR
.PP
.EX
magus graph deps -o mermaid
.EE
.PP
\fIDAG rooted at one project, dependents up\fR
.PP
.EX
magus graph deps pkg/api --upstream
.EE
.PP
\fIKnowledge graph for an external viewer\fR
.PP
.EX
magus graph export -o json > graph.json
.EE
.PP
\fIGraphML for Gephi or yEd\fR
.PP
.EX
magus graph export -o graphml > graph.graphml
.EE
.PP
\fIA query's neighborhood as Mermaid\fR
.PP
.EX
magus graph export --select 'kind:spell go' -o mermaid
.EE
.PP
\fIWhere structural risk concentrates\fR
.PP
.EX
magus graph stats
.EE
.PP
\fIDoc coverage for spells only\fR
.PP
.EX
magus graph stats --kind spell
.EE
.PP
\fIOpen knowledge graph in browser\fR
.PP
.EX
magus graph open
.EE
.PP
\fIOpen target dependency graph\fR
.PP
.EX
magus graph open --targets
.EE
.PP
\fIScope target graph to one project\fR
.PP
.EX
magus graph open --targets docs
.EE
.PP
\fIPrint the URL instead of opening\fR
.PP
.EX
magus graph open --targets --print
.EE
.PP
.SH SEE ALSO
\fBmagus\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-ls\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-describe\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-run\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-x\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-where\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-tail\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-affected\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-insight\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-watch\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-status\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-doctor\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-config\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-server\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-completion\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-init\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-self\fR(1),
\fBmagus\-version\fR(1)
.br
